Objectives :- From this experiment, the student will be able to
● To provide an overview of concepts of Cloud Computing .
● To encourage students to indulge into research in Cloud Computing.
Outcomes :- The learner will be able to
● To understand and appreciate cloud architecture.
● To analyse the local and global impact of computing on individuals, organisations,
and society.
● To recognize the need for, and an ability to engage in life-long learning.
Theory :-
Cloud computing enables companies to consume compute resources as a utility -- just like
electricity -- rather than having to build and maintain computing infrastructures in-house.
Cloud
Computing promises several attractive benefits for businesses and end users.
Three of the main benefits of cloud computing include :-
● Self-service provisioning: End users can spin up computing resources for
almost any type of workload on-demand.
● Elasticity: Companies can scale up as computing needs increase and then scale
down again as demands decrease.
● Pay per use: Computing resources are measured at a granular level, allowing
users to pay only for the resources and workloads they use.
Cloud computing services can be Private, Public or Hybrid.
● Private cloud services are delivered from a business' data center to internal
users. This model offers versatility and convenience, while preserving
management, control and security. Internal customers may or may not be
billed for services through IT chargeback.
● In the Public cloud model, a third-party provider delivers the cloud service
over the Internet. Public cloud services are sold on-demand, typically by the
minute or the hour. Customers only pay for the CPU cycles, storage or
bandwidth they consume. Leading public cloud providers include Amazon
Web Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure, IBM/Soft Layer and Google
Compute Engine.
● Hybrid cloud is a combination of public cloud services and on-premises
private cloud – with orchestration and automation between the two.
Companies can run mission-critical workloads or sensitive applications on the
private cloud while using the public cloud for workloads that must scale
on-demand. The goal of hybrid cloud is to create a unified, automated,
scalable environment which takes advantage of all that a public cloud
infrastructure can provide, while still maintaining control over mission-critical
data
Types of cloud computing :-
IT people talk about three different kinds of cloud computing, where different services are
being provided for you. Note that there's a certain amount of vagueness about how these
things are defined and some overlap between them.
• Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) means you're buying access to raw
computing hardware over the Net, such as servers or storage. Since you buy
what you need and pay-as-you-go, this is often referred to as utility
computing. Ordinary web hosting is a simple example of IaaS: you pay a
monthly subscription or a per
megabyte/gigabyte fee to have a hosting company serve up files for your
website from their servers.
• Software as a Service (SaaS) means you use a complete application running on
someone else's system. Web-based email and Google Documents are perhaps
the best-known examples. Zoho is another well-known SaaS provider offering
a variety of office applications online.
• Platform as a Service (PaaS) means you develop applications using Web-based
tools so they run on systems software and hardware provided by another
company. So, for example, you might develop your own ecommerce website
but have the whole thing, including the shopping cart, checkout, and payment
mechanism running on a merchant's server. Force.com (from salesforce.com)
and the Google App Engine are examples of PaaS.
Advantages and disadvantages of cloud computing :-
Advantages :- The pros of cloud computing are obvious and compelling. If your business is
selling books or repairing shoes, why get involved in the nitty gritty of buying and
maintaining a complex computer system? If you run an insurance office, do you really want
your sales agents wasting time running anti-virus software, upgrading word-processors, or
worrying about hard-drive crashes? Do you really want them cluttering your expensive
computers with their personal emails, illegally shared MP3 files, and naughty YouTube
videos—when you could leave that responsibility to someone else? Cloud computing allows
you to buy in only the services you want, when you want them, cutting the upfront capital
costs of computers and peripherals. You avoid equipment going out of date and other
familiar IT problems like ensuring system security and reliability
Disadvantages :- Instant convenience comes at a price. Instead of purchasing computers and
software, cloud computing means you buy services, so one-off, upfront capital costs become
ongoing operating costs instead. That might work out much more expensive in the long-term.
If you're using software as a service (for example, writing a report using an online word
processor or sending emails through webmail), you need a reliable, high-speed, broadband
Internet connection functioning the whole time you're working. That's something we take for
granted in countries such as the United States, but it's much more of an issue in developing
countries or rural areas where broadband is unavailable.